[DOC] Additional content on Control Plane listeners and feature gates (#5024)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/modules/operators/ref-operator-cluster.adoc

This value should be increased when using Strimzi to build container images containing many connectors or using a slow container registry.

`STRIMZI_FEATURE_GATES`:: Optional.
Enables or disables feature gates that activate new features or change the behavior of the operator.
For more information about each feature gate, see xref:ref-operator-cluster-feature-gates-{context}[].

[id='ref-operator-cluster-feature-gates-{context}']
== Feature gates

Strimzi operators support _feature gates_ to enable or disable certain features and functionality. 
When enabled, a feature gate alters the behavior of the relevant operator. 

Feature gates have a default state of either _enabled_ or _disabled_. 

> To modify a feature gate's default state, use the `STRIMZI_FEATURE_GATES` environment variable in operator's configuration.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To modify a feature gate's default state, use the `STRIMZI_FEATURE_GATES` environment variable in the operator's configuration.  
```

> You can modify multiple feature gates in one environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can modify multiple feature gates using this single environment variable.
```

Feature gates have three stages of maturity:

* Alpha — typically disabled by default
* Beta — typically enabled by default
* General Availability (GA) — typically enabled by default

Alpha stage features might be experimental or unstable, subject to change, or not sufficiently tested for production use.
Beta stage features are well tested and their functionality is not likely to change.
GA stage features are stable and should not change in future. 

> We might remove a GA stage feature gate that has been enabled by default for some time, so disabling the feature will no longer be possible. 

Reviewer: Are we trying to say the feature is incorporated and is no longer as a feature gate? If so, could be clearer.

Author: I'm tying myself in knots with the terminology. I suggest making this a simple note:

NOTE: If a GA feature has been enabled by default for some time, its feature gate might be removed.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure _If a GA feature has been enabled by default for some time, its feature gate might be removed._ describes well what would happen. In many cases we will decide straight away to remove it when it reaches GA - this is how it is planned for the `ControlPlaneListener` for example.

Author: OK. I suggest we keep it very simple:

NOTE: Feature gates might be removed when they reach GA.

Author: This means that the feature was incorporated into Strimzi and can no longer be disabled.

> Alpha and beta stage features will be removed if they do not prove to be useful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alpha and beta stage features are removed if they do not prove to be useful.
```

> .Supported feature gates and the Strimzi versions when they moved to alpha, beta, or GA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Supported feature gates and the Strimzi versions when they moved to alpha, beta, or GA
```

This value should be increased when using Strimzi to build container images containing many connectors or using a slow container registry.

`STRIMZI_FEATURE_GATES`:: Optional.
Enables or disables feature gates that activate new features or change the behavior of the operator.
For more information about each feature gate, see xref:ref-operator-cluster-feature-gates-{context}[].

[id='ref-operator-cluster-feature-gates-{context}']
== Feature gates

Strimzi operators support _feature gates_ to enable or disable certain features and functionality. 

> When enabled, a feature gate alters the behavior of the relevant operator. 

Reviewer: I'm not clear on the difference between introducing a feature and changing the behavior of the operator.  Is it that the feature gate changes the behavior of the operator by introducing new functionality?

Author: Yes, that's how I understand it. I updated this to:

> Enabling a feature gate changes the behavior of the relevant operator and introduces the feature to your Strimzi deployment.

Feature gates have a default state of either _enabled_ or _disabled_. 
To modify a feature gate's default state, use the `STRIMZI_FEATURE_GATES` environment variable in the operator's configuration.  
You can modify multiple feature gates using this single environment variable.

Feature gates have three stages of maturity:

* Alpha — typically disabled by default
* Beta — typically enabled by default
* General Availability (GA) — typically enabled by default

Alpha stage features might be experimental or unstable, subject to change, or not sufficiently tested for production use.
Beta stage features are well tested and their functionality is not likely to change.
GA stage features are stable and should not change in future. 
Alpha and beta stage features are removed if they do not prove to be useful.

> NOTE: Feature gates might be removed when they reach GA.

Reviewer: Do we want to make it clear that the GA feature is incorporated and can no longer be toggled on and off?

Reviewer 2: That will differ feature gate by feature gate. Different gates have different purpose and will end up differently.

  - name: STRIMZI_FEATURE_GATES
    value: +FeatureGate1,-FeatureGate2
----

=== Control plane listener feature gate

Use the `ControlPlaneListener` feature gate to change the communication paths used for inter-broker communications within your Kafka cluster.

The Kubernetes control plane manages the workloads running on the worker nodes. 
Services such as the Kubernetes API server and the controller manager run on the control plane. 
The Kubernetes data plane provides resources to containers, including CPU, memory, network, and storage.

In Strimzi, control plane traffic consists of controller connections that maintain the desired state of the Kafka cluster. 
Data plane traffic mainly consists of data replication between the leader broker and the follower brokers.

When the `ControlPlaneListener` feature gate is disabled, control plane and data plane traffic go through the same internal listener on port 9091. 
This was the default behavior before the feature gate was introduced.

When `ControlPlaneListener` is enabled, control plane traffic goes through a dedicated _control plane listener_ on port 9090. 
Data plane traffic continues to use the internal listener on port 9091.

> Using control plane listeners can provide increased performance because important controller connections, such as partition leadership changes, are not delayed by data replication across brokers.

Reviewer: _increased performance_ -- maybe can _improve performance_?

=== Control Plane listener feature gate

> You can use the `ControlPlaneListener` feature gate to change the communication paths used for inter-broker communications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `ControlPlaneListener` feature gate to change the communication paths used for inter-broker communications.
```

> 

Reviewer: I wonder if it would be useful to introduce with a line on the concepts of _control_ and _data_planes first? And use those descriptions in the brackets.

Author: Yes, that makes sense. I attempted to summarise the control plane and data plane first. Please have a another look.

Reviewer: Looks good

When `ControlPlaneListener` is enabled, Kafka brokers use a dedicated internal _control plane listener_ for controller connections (that is, traffic from the Kubernetes control plane) between brokers. 
The control plane listener uses port 9090. 

> Data connections (data replication between the Kafka brokers) continues to use the internal listener on port 9091. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data connections (data replication between the Kafka brokers) continue to use the internal listener on port 9091. 
```

When `ControlPlaneListener` is disabled, controller and data connections go through the same internal listener on port 9091. 
This was the default behavior before the feature gate was introduced.

> Control plane listeners might improve performance because important requests from the control plane, such as partition leadership changes, are not delayed by data plane traffic, such as data replication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Control plane listeners might improve performance because important requests from the control plane, such as partition leadership changes, are not delayed by data plane traffic, such as data replication across clusters.
```

Author: If I understand correctly, the data replication is across Kafka brokers.
